@section Universal Tactile Document Markup Language (UTDML)

Universal Tactile Document Markup Language (UTDML) is  a way of adding 
braille 
translations, information synchronizing braille and print, and tactile 
graphics to an original xml document, while preserving the structure and 
text of that document. This is done by using a number of new xml 
elements and attributes. It is best shown by examples.

The first example shows a short xml document designed to show how 
UTDML operates. Note that, though it looks like a Daisy xml file, it is 
not, and would not validate. liblouisutdml, by default, requires only 
that 
an xml document be well-formed. It will perform validation if 
requested. The verse which this example contains is not intended as a 
serious poetic effort, but it is intended as a reflection of the hacker 
mentality.

@example
<dtbook>
<head/>
<book>
<list>
<li>Mary had a little code</li>
<li><em>That overflowed the stack;</em></li>
<li>And everywhere that Mary went</li>
<li>She simply <em>had</em> to hack.</li>
</list>
</book>
</dtbook>
@end example

The next example was derived from the first in two steps. The files
needed for these steps are in the @file{lbu_files} directory. First a
UTDML file was produced by aplying @file{makeutd.cfg} (via the
@command{file2brl} command). The essential feature of this file is that
it has the configuration setting @code{formatFor utd}. The result is a
file that contains the UTDML tags and Unicode braille encoded as UTF-8.
This is not very readable, so anotgher step was necessary.
@file{viewxml.cfg} was then applied to the result. 
This file uses a
special liblouis table to produce readable text showing everything in
the UTDML file. The Unicode braille is shown in hexadecimal form, as
liblouis usually shows unknown characters.

@example
  x<?xml version="1.0"
encoding="UTF8"
standalone="yes"?> <dtbook>
<head> <meta name="utd"
content="braillePageNumber=2,to-
pMargin=10,leftMargin=20,cellsP-
erLine=32,linesPerPage=25"/>
</head> <book> <brl> <newpage
number="1"/> </brl> <list>
<li>Mary had a little code<brl
index="0,0,1,3,4,5,5,8,9,10,11,-
11,17,18,19,20,21"> <newline
xy="20,10"/>'\x2820' '\x280d'
'\x281c' '\x283d' '\x2800'
'\x2838' '\x2813' '\x2800'
'\x2801' '\x2800' '\x2807'
'\x2807' '\x2800' '\x2809'
'\x2815' '\x2819' '\x2811'</brl>
</li> <li> <em>That overflowed
the stack;<brl
index="0,1,1,1,1,5,6,7,8,10,11,-
12,14,16,17,20,21,21,23,24,25,2-
6"> <newline
xy="20,18"/>'\x2828' '\x2828'
'\x2820' '\x281e' '\x2800'
'\x2815' '\x2827' '\x283b'
'\x280b' '\x2807' '\x282a'
'\x282b' '\x2800' '\x282e'
'\x2800' '\x2828' '\x280c'
'\x2801' '\x2809' '\x2805'
'\x2806'</brl> </em> </li>
<li>And everywhere that Mary
went<brl
index="0,0,3,4,4,8,9,9,14,15,19-
,20,20,21,23,24,25,26,28">
<newline xy="20,26"/>'\x2820'
'\x282f' '\x2800' '\x2810'
'\x2811' '\x283d' '\x2810'
'\x2831' '\x2800' '\x281e'
'\x2800' '\x2820' '\x280d'
'\x281c' '\x283d' '\x2800'
'\x283a' '\x2822' '\x281e'</brl>
</li> <li>She simply <brl
index="0,0,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10">
<newline xy="20,34"/>'\x2820'
'\x2829' '\x2811' '\x2800'
'\x280e' '\x280a' '\x280d'
'\x280f' '\x2807' '\x283d'
'\x2800'</brl> <em>had<brl
index="0,1,1,1">'\x2800'
'\x2828' '\x2838' '\x2813'</brl>
</em> to hack.<brl
index="0,2,5,6,7,8,9">'\x2800'
'\x2816' '\x2813' '\x2801'
'\x2809' '\x2805' '\x2832'</brl>
</li> </list> <brl> <newline
xy="155,210"/> <span
class="brlonly">'\x2800'
'\x2800' '\x2800' '\x283c'
'\x2801'</span> <newpage
number="2"/> </brl> </book>
</dtbook>
@end example

An analysiis of the example will show the main features of UTDML.

The @code{<?xml} processing instruction was added by liblouisutdml to 
prooduce a well-formed xml document. it is not part of UTDML.

In the first example the @code{<head>} element is empty. UTDML has added a 
@code{<meta>} sub-element with @code{name="utd"} and @code{content} 
attributes. The value of the latter id a list of confiburation settings 
and their values.

The tag @code{<book>} has been assigned the document style in
@file{dtbook.sem}. UTDML therefore adds the first @code{<brl>} node.  It
has no @code{index} attribute, since it contains no braille to be
synchronized with the print text, but does congain braille formatting
information. It contains a @code{<newpage>} node with the attribute
@code{number="1"}. A @code{<newpage>} node must precede the first
@code{<newline>} node on a page, of which more below.

Next we have the first line of the verse in the first example, followed 
immediately by a @code{<brl>} node. This one, however, has an 
@code{index} attribute. The value of this attribute shows the position 
in the input text corresponding to each position in the braille 
translation. The translation itself follows, but first we have 
@code{<newline xy="20,10"/>}. The attribute name suggests the standard 
variable names for points in a plane, in this case the left end of the 
line. The attribute value is reminiscent of the standard notation for 
the coordinates of such points. The x value is 10, since this is the 
first line on the page and it is down from the top by the value of the 
configuration setting @code{topMargin}. Line coordinates are expressed 
in "half-dot" units, one unit being .05 inch. The y-coordinate of this 
line is 20, which is the value of @code{leftMargin} in the file 
@file{makeutd.cfg}. If the line were indented it would have a 
y-coordinate of the left margin plus 5 times the number of braille cells 
of the indentation. The next @code{newline} in this example has an 
x-coordinate of 18, since the spacing between lines is 8 half-dots. If a 
line contains cells with dots 7 or 8 the next line is spaced 10 
half-dots.

Following the @code<newline xy="20,10"/>} are a number of strings within 
single quotes which give the braille translation in US English Grade 2. 
This is Unicode braille, which gives the dot patterns. In the UTDML file 
it is encoded in UTF-8. It was rendered readable by using a special 
liblouis table.

The verse in the first example has its second line emphasized. This can 
be seen within the @code{<brl>} tag for that line. This is even clearer 
when considering the fourth line of the verse, where the word @samp{had} 
is emphasized. This is on the UTDML line @code{<newline xy="24,20"/>}. 
Here there is a separate @code{<brl>} element for the emphasized word.

The last @code{<newline>} element in the example has co-ordinates 
@code{220,155}. This is because it is the last line on the page. Note 
that it is within a @code{<brl>} tag that has no @code{indexx} 
attribute, as is the following @code{<newpage>} tag. The aforementioned 
@code{<newline xy="220,155"/>} is followed by a page number. The line is 
indented enough to put the page number right at the end. This is because 
there is nothing else on this line. If there were, the text would 
precede the page number. This page number is enclosed in the tag 
@code{<span class="brlonly">}, which indicates that it is not part of 
the original text.

Following this, and still inside the @code{<brl>} tag is a second 
@code{<newpage>} tag indicating a page number of 2.

Finally, the example concludes with the original @code{</book>} and 
@code{</dtbook>} tags.

From the above example it can be seen that the characteristics of a UTDML 
document are:

The structure and text of the original document are preserved.

@code{<brl>} nodes are added to contain braille translation, formatting 
and synchronization information.

Usually @code{<brl>} nodes follow text nodes in the original document, 
but they may occur in other places where braille formatting or 
braill-only information is needed. In such cases they will not have an 
@code{index} attribute to give synchronization information with the 
print text.

An extra @code{<meta>} tag is added to the @code{<head>} element, giving 
information about the braille poortions of the document. An xml file 
that is to be augmented with UTDML must therefore have a @code{<head>} 
element or equivalent, but it may be empty.

These examples do not show the handling of tactile graphics or of 
braille that has been modified by a transcriber. The latter will be 
handled by @code{<span class="locked">} tags within @code{<brl>} tags. 
The exact way in which tactile graphics will be handled is still being 
decided.

UTDML should handle plain mathematical equations, but the places where 
math and text meet still need work. Matrices may not give good results.

The table of contents generator and handling of computer code still need 
to be implemented for UTDML.
